v0.45 Changelog: Decomposition Inspection and Pre-defined Gate Sets (#9414)
PennyLaneAI/pennylane: doc/releases/changelog-0.45.0.md

  same-degree polynomial with different coefficients.
  [(#8685)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/8685)

<h4>Decomposition Inspection and Pre-defined Gate Sets 📠</h4>

> New tools dedicated to accessible inspectability of PennyLane's experimental graph decomposition system

Reviewer: ```suggestion
New tools dedicated to accessible inspectability of PennyLane's graph-based decomposition system (enabled with :func:`~.decomposition.enable_graph`)
```

I think we can start to position the graph-based system as not experimental 😁, even though it still requires a toggle. Just a minor positioning pivot!

are now available! With this release, you can query the solutions of the graph-based system to 

> understand how PennyLane decomposed down a circuit, and why specific rules where chosen when the graph system is enabled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
understand how PennyLane decomposed a circuit, why specific rules where chosen over others, and more.
```

[(#9257)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/9257)
[(#9260)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/9260)
[(#9322)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/9322)
[(#9359)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/9359)
[(#8915)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/8915)
[(#9045)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/9045)
[(#9259)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/9259)

> [(#9359)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/9359)

Reviewer: I think it's still a good idea to have the PR links attached to individual features :)

* The name of a decomposition rule is by default that of the function that defines the rule, but now
  it is possible to assign custom names to decomposition rules  using the ``name`` argument in

>   :func:`qp.register_resources <pennylane.decomposition.register_resources>`. This makes it easier to identify specific rules.

Reviewer: Better to lead with the new feature benefits IMO 👀 

```suggestion
* It is now possible to assign custom names to decomposition rules using the ``name`` argument in
   :func:`qp.register_resources <pennylane.decomposition.register_resources>`, making it easier to
   identify specific decomposition rules.
```

Author: sounds good 👍

>   ```python

Reviewer: need to have ``enable_graph`` in the code examples below 👀

  import pennylane as qp

  @qp.register_resources({qp.CNOT: 1, qp.H: 2}, name='my_cz_rule')
  def cz_to_h_cnot(wires):
      qp.H(wires[1])
      qp.CNOT(wires)
      qp.H(wires[1])
  ```
  ```pycon
  >>> cz_to_h_cnot.name
  'my_cz_rule'
  ```

* Operators in PennyLane can accommodate multiple decompositions which can be queried with
  the function :func:`~pennylane.list_decomps`. This function now returns a new ``DecompCollection``

>   object allowing more intuitive access to decomposition rules by index or by name.

Reviewer: Same comment as the one above 👀. Better to lead with the new feature + benefits. So something like this: 

> The `list_decomps` function now returns an object that is easier to interact with, including better legibility when printing the entire set of available decomposition rules and when printing individual ones.

Then you can say something about ``DecompCollection`` afterwards if you'd like (but the point is that the user won't really care about a ``DecompCollection`` object)

  ```pycon
  >>> collection = qp.list_decomps(qp.CRX)
  >>> print(collection)
  Available Decomposition Rules:
  0: _crx_to_rx_cz
  1: _crx_to_rz_ry
  2: _crx_to_h_crz
  3: _crx_to_ppr

  >>> collection[0]
  DecompositionRule(name=_crx_to_rx_cz)

  >>> collection['_crx_to_ppr']
  DecompositionRule(name=_crx_to_ppr)

  >>> print(qp.draw(collection[0])(0.5, wires=[0, 1]))
  0: ───────────╭●────────────╭●─┤
  1: ──RX(0.25)─╰Z──RX(-0.25)─╰Z─┤

>   ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
  ```pycon
  >>> collection = qp.list_decomps(qp.CRX)
  >>> print(collection)
  Available Decomposition Rules:
  0: _crx_to_rx_cz
  1: _crx_to_rz_ry
  2: _crx_to_h_crz
  3: _crx_to_ppr
  >>> collection[0]
  DecompositionRule(name=_crx_to_rx_cz)
  >>> collection['_crx_to_ppr']
  DecompositionRule(name=_crx_to_ppr)
  >>> print(qp.draw(collection[0])(0.5, wires=[0, 1]))
  0: ───────────╭●────────────╭●─┤
  1: ──RX(0.25)─╰Z──RX(-0.25)─╰Z─┤
  ```
````

* A new function :func:`~.decomposition.inspect_decomps` allows for the visualization and inspection

>   of all the possible decomposition paths the graph system can take for a concrete operator instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A new function called :func:`~.decomposition.inspect_decomps` allows for the visualization and inspection
  of all possible decomposition paths the graph system can take for a concrete operator instance.
```

nice! I would put this entry above the ``list_decomps`` one IMO 👀

Reviewer: Is it worth adding any verbiage for distinguishing ``inspect_decomps`` from ``list_decomps``? 🤔

Author: >I would put this entry above the list_decomps one

hm... maybe you are right 🤔 
I thought about the ordering of these inspection features as a progression on the level of detail one would get:
1st show that an operator can have multiple decomposition rules using `list_decomps`
2nd illustrate functionality that inspects how the graph choose between the availabel options

>Is it worth adding any verbiage for distinguishing inspect_decomps from list_decomps?

Fair point

  1: ──RX(0.25)─╰RZX(-0.25)─┤
  Gate Count: {PauliRot(pauli_word=ZX): 1, PauliRot(pauli_word=X): 1}
  ```

* A new :mod:`~.gate_sets` module contains pre-defined gate sets
  that can be plugged into the ``gate_set`` argument of the :func:`~pennylane.transforms.decompose` transform.
  These pre-defined gate sets can be easily accessed and integrated into decompositions workflows. Key gate sets include:

  - ``qp.gate_sets.CLIFFORD_T`` which contains the Clifford+T gate set and ``qp.gate_sets.CLIFFORD_T_PLUS_RZ`` with an additional ``RZ`` gate.
  - ``qp.gate_sets.ROTATIONS_PLUS_CNOT`` which contains single-qubit rotations and ``CNOT``.
  - ``qp.gate_sets.IDENTITY`` which contains the ``Identity`` and the ``GlobalPhase`` gates.

* When the :func:`qml.transforms.decompose <pennylane.transforms.decompose>` transform is used to
  decompose the operators in a circuit, and the graph-based decomposition system is enabled
  via :func:`~.decomposition.enable_graph`, the most resource efficient decomposition will be chosen (minimizing gate count or weighted cost).

  To verify how the the decomposition graph is choosing decomposition rules for each operator instance in the

>   circuit the new function :func:`~.transforms.decomp_inspector` can be used.

Reviewer: Similar comment as ones above 🙂. Always start with the new feature and its benefit. You can always add more context later, but we want to start off with the hooks that get the reader interested in continuing reading 👀

Reviewer: I also think it's worth highlighting this feature higher up in the changelog 🤔. Maybe after ``inspect_decomps``? Maybe before it? The ``gate_sets`` feature can probably go last, so you may need to modify the code example a bit for the section to flow logically. Up to you!

Author: I followed some of the reordering of the entries you suggested. This is the current order:
- :func:`~.decomposition.inspect_decomps`
- :func:`~.transforms.decomp_inspector`
- :func:`~pennylane.list_decomps`
- :mod:`~.gate_sets`

  same-degree polynomial with different coefficients.
  [(#8685)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/8685)

<h4>Decomposition Inspection and Pre-defined Gate Sets 📠</h4>

New tools dedicated to accessible inspectability of PennyLane's graph-based decomposition system (enabled with :func:`~.decomposition.enable_graph`)
are now available! With this release, you can query the solutions of the graph-based system to 
understand how PennyLane decomposed a circuit, why specific rules where chosen over others, and more.

* It is now possible to assign custom names to decomposition rules using the ``name`` argument in
   :func:`qp.register_resources <pennylane.decomposition.register_resources>`, making it easier to
   identify specific decomposition rules.

>    [(#9257)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/9257)

Reviewer: No clue why this is bolded, but it is 😅 

<img width="793" height="98" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/05b15c1c-304d-4dd5-99be-52fe7a6f3c85" />

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* It is now possible to assign custom names to decomposition rules using the ``name`` argument in
  :func:`qp.register_resources <pennylane.decomposition.register_resources>`, making it easier to
  identify specific decomposition rules.
  [(#9257)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/9257)
```

Ah! I think it's the indentation.

  of all possible decomposition paths the graph system can take for a concrete operator instance.
  [(#9322)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/9322)
  [(#9359)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/9359)

  ```pycon
  >>> qp.inspect_decomps(qp.CRX(0.5, wires=[0, 1]))
  Decomposition 0 (name: _crx_to_rx_cz)
  0: ───────────╭●────────────╭●─┤
  1: ──RX(0.25)─╰Z──RX(-0.25)─╰Z─┤
  Gate Count: {RX: 2, CZ: 2}

  Decomposition 1 (name: _crx_to_rz_ry)
  0: ─────────────────────╭●────────────╭●────────────┤
  1: ──RZ(1.57)──RY(0.25)─╰X──RY(-0.25)─╰X──RZ(-1.57)─┤
  Gate Count: {RZ: 2, RY: 2, CNOT: 2}

  Decomposition 2 (name: _crx_to_h_crz)
  0: ────╭●───────────┤
  1: ──H─╰RZ(0.50)──H─┤
  Gate Count: {Hadamard: 2, CRZ: 1}

  Decomposition 3 (name: _crx_to_ppr)
  0: ───────────╭RZX(-0.25)─┤
  1: ──RX(0.25)─╰RZX(-0.25)─┤
  Gate Count: {PauliRot(pauli_word=ZX): 1, PauliRot(pauli_word=X): 1}
  ```
  
  For each decomposition rule applicable to the operator instance, the output includes its name, circuit
  diagram, gate count, and wire allocation (if any).

* To verify how the the decomposition graph is choosing decomposition rules for each operator instance in the

>   circuit the new function :func:`~.transforms.decomp_inspector` can be used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A new function called :func:`~.transforms.decomp_inspector` is available for verifying how the 
   the decomposition graph chooses decomposition rules for each operator instance in a
  circuit.
```

More consistent phrasing with other changelog entries :)

  [(#9359)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/9359)

  The :func:`~.transforms.decomp_inspector` acts as a transform that can be applied on a QNode as a decorator.
  It returns an ``inspector`` object that allows to interactivelly query a given operator to identify which

>   decomposition rule were considered and which one was chosen as the most resource-efficient one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  It returns an object that allows for interactively querying a given operator to identify which
  decomposition rules was considered and which one was chosen.
```

  Consider the following example where we want to efficiently decompose a ``MultiRZ`` into single-qubit
  rotations and ``CNOT``s:

  ```python
  qp.decomposition.enable_graph()

  gate_sets = {"CNOT", "RX", "RY", "RZ", "Identity", "GlobalPhase", "MidMeasureMP"}

  @qp.decomp_inspector(gate_set=gate_sets, num_work_wires=2)
  @qp.qnode(qp.device("default.qubit"))
  def circuit():
      qp.ctrl(qp.MultiRZ(0.5, [0, 1]), control=[3, 4, 5])
      return qp.probs()

  inspector = circuit()

>   ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
  ```

  We can then call the ``inspector``'s ``inspect_decomps`` method and provide the ``MultiRZ`` 
  instance of interest to see which decomposition rules were considered.

````

  Full Expansion Gates: {GlobalPhase: 76, RX: 16, MidMeasure: 4, RY: 24, RZ: 80, CNOT: 72}
  Weighted Cost: 196.0
  ```

  For each decomposition rule applicable to the controlled ``MultiRZ`` operator instance, the
  inspector provides a summary of its weighted cost, wire allocations, and the "Full Expansion"
  (the final gate counts produced after decomposing all the way down to the target gate set).

  Similar to the :func:`qp.transforms.decompose <pennylane.transforms.decompose>` 
  transform, the :func:`~.transforms.decomp_inspector` provides the ability to inject new
  decomposition rules via the keyword arguments `fixed_decomps` and `alt_decomps`.
  For more details on the inspection capabilities please consult the documentation for :func:`~.transforms.decomp_inspector`.

* The :func:`~pennylane.list_decomps` function now returns an object that is easier to interact with,
  including better legibility when printing the entire set of available decomposition rules and when

>   printing individual ones. The object returned supports accessing a specific rule by index or by name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  printing individual ones. Additionally, object returned supports accessing a specific rule by index 
  or by name.
```

  [(#9260)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/9260)

  ```pycon
  >>> collection = qp.list_decomps(qp.CRX)
  >>> print(collection)
  Available Decomposition Rules:
  0: _crx_to_rx_cz
  1: _crx_to_rz_ry
  2: _crx_to_h_crz
  3: _crx_to_ppr
  >>> collection[0]
  DecompositionRule(name=_crx_to_rx_cz)
  >>> collection['_crx_to_ppr']
  DecompositionRule(name=_crx_to_ppr)
  >>> print(qp.draw(collection[0])(0.5, wires=[0, 1]))
  0: ───────────╭●────────────╭●─┤
  1: ──RX(0.25)─╰Z──RX(-0.25)─╰Z─┤
  ```

>   * A new :mod:`~.gate_sets` module contains pre-defined gate sets

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A new :mod:`~.gate_sets` module contains pre-defined gate sets
```

  that can be plugged into the ``gate_set`` argument of the :func:`~pennylane.transforms.decompose` transform.
  These pre-defined gate sets can be easily accessed and integrated into decompositions workflows. Key gate sets include:
  [(#8915)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/8915)
  [(#9045)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/9045)
  [(#9259)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/9259)

  - ``qp.gate_sets.CLIFFORD_T`` which contains the Clifford+T gate set and ``qp.gate_sets.CLIFFORD_T_PLUS_RZ`` with an additional ``RZ`` gate.
  - ``qp.gate_sets.ROTATIONS_PLUS_CNOT`` which contains single-qubit rotations and ``CNOT``.
  - ``qp.gate_sets.IDENTITY`` which contains the ``Identity`` and the ``GlobalPhase`` gates.

  Using the previous ``MultiRZ`` circuit example, we can now conveniently specify the
  ``qp.gate_sets.ROTATIONS_PLUS_CNOT`` set as the gate target:

  ```python
  qp.decomposition.enable_graph()

  @qp.decomp_inspector(gate_set=qp.gate_sets.ROTATIONS_PLUS_CNOT, num_work_wires=2)
  @qp.qnode(qp.device("default.qubit"))
  def circuit():
      qp.ctrl(qp.MultiRZ(0.5, [0, 1]), control=[3, 4, 5])
      return qp.probs()

>   ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
  Here is an example using the ``ROTATIONS_PLUS_CNOT`` gate set to decompose a controlled ``MultiRZ`` gate:
  
  ```python
  qp.decomposition.enable_graph()

  @qp.decompose(gate_set=qp.gate_sets.ROTATIONS_PLUS_CNOT, num_work_wires=2)
  @qp.qnode(qp.device("default.qubit"))
  def circuit():
      qp.ctrl(qp.MultiRZ(0.5, [0, 1]), control=[3, 4, 5])
      return qp.expval(qp.Z(0))
  ```

  ```pycon
  >>> print(qp.specs(circuit, level="device")().resources.gate_counts
  {'RZ': 54, 'RY': 14, 'GlobalPhase': 52, 'CNOT': 36, 'CRZ': 4, 'CRY': 4, 'C(GlobalPhase)': 4, 'Toffoli': 2}
  ```
````

Just corrected the code example :). You had ``decomp_inspector`` there still so the example wasn't running as expected!

  [(#9322)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/9322)
  [(#9359)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/9359)

  ```pycon
  >>> qp.inspect_decomps(qp.CRX(0.5, wires=[0, 1]))
  Decomposition 0 (name: _crx_to_rx_cz)
  0: ───────────╭●────────────╭●─┤
  1: ──RX(0.25)─╰Z──RX(-0.25)─╰Z─┤
  Gate Count: {RX: 2, CZ: 2}

  Decomposition 1 (name: _crx_to_rz_ry)
  0: ─────────────────────╭●────────────╭●────────────┤
  1: ──RZ(1.57)──RY(0.25)─╰X──RY(-0.25)─╰X──RZ(-1.57)─┤
  Gate Count: {RZ: 2, RY: 2, CNOT: 2}

  Decomposition 2 (name: _crx_to_h_crz)
  0: ────╭●───────────┤
  1: ──H─╰RZ(0.50)──H─┤
  Gate Count: {Hadamard: 2, CRZ: 1}

  Decomposition 3 (name: _crx_to_ppr)
  0: ───────────╭RZX(-0.25)─┤
  1: ──RX(0.25)─╰RZX(-0.25)─┤
  Gate Count: {PauliRot(pauli_word=ZX): 1, PauliRot(pauli_word=X): 1}
  ```
  
  For each decomposition rule applicable to the operator instance, the output includes its name, circuit
  diagram, gate count, and wire allocation (if any).

* A new function called :func:`~.transforms.decomp_inspector` is available for verifying how the 
   the decomposition graph chooses decomposition rules for each operator instance in a

>   circuit.

Author: ```suggestion
* A new function called :func:`~.transforms.decomp_inspector` is available for verifying how 
   the decomposition graph chooses decomposition rules for each operator instance in a
  circuit.
```

>    the decomposition graph chooses decomposition rules for each operator instance in a
>   circuit.
>   [(#9359)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/9359)

Author: ```suggestion
* A new function called :func:`~.transforms.decomp_inspector` is available for verifying how 
  the decomposition graph chooses decomposition rules for each operator instance in a circuit.
  [(#9359)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/9359)
```

  The :func:`~.transforms.decomp_inspector` acts as a transform that can be applied on a QNode as a decorator.
  It returns an object that allows for interactively querying a given operator to identify which

>   decomposition rules was considered and which one was chosen.

Author: ```suggestion
  It returns an object that allows for interactively querying a given operator to identify which
  decomposition rules were considered and which one was chosen.
```

  Full Expansion Gates: {GlobalPhase: 76, RX: 16, MidMeasure: 4, RY: 24, RZ: 80, CNOT: 72}
  Weighted Cost: 196.0
  ```

  For each decomposition rule applicable to the controlled ``MultiRZ`` operator instance, the
  inspector provides a summary of its weighted cost, wire allocations, and the "Full Expansion"
  (the final gate counts produced after decomposing all the way down to the target gate set).

  Similar to the :func:`qp.transforms.decompose <pennylane.transforms.decompose>` 
  transform, the :func:`~.transforms.decomp_inspector` provides the ability to inject new
  decomposition rules via the keyword arguments `fixed_decomps` and `alt_decomps`.
  For more details on the inspection capabilities please consult the documentation for :func:`~.transforms.decomp_inspector`.

* The :func:`~pennylane.list_decomps` function now returns an object that is easier to interact with,
  including better legibility when printing the entire set of available decomposition rules and when
  printing individual ones. Additionally, object returned supports accessing a specific rule by index 

>   or by name.

Author: ```suggestion
  printing individual ones. Additionally, the object returned supports accessing a specific rule by index 
  or by name.
```
